Self and Interpersonal Relationships
2.5 Identify the effects of your self-concept and self-esteem on your relationships with others.

Listen to the audio

Your self-concept and self-esteem filter every interaction with others. They determine how you approach, respond to, and interpret messages. Specifically, your self-concept and self-esteem affect your self-fulfilling prophecies, your interpretation of messages, your level of self-disclosure, your social needs, your typical communication style, and your ability to be sensitive to others.

2.5.1 Self and Interaction with Others
Listen to the audio

Your image of yourself and your sense of self-esteem directly affect how you interact with others. Who you think you are affects how you communicate with other people.

We defined human communication as the way we make sense of the world and share that sense with others by creating meaning through verbal and nonverbal messages. Symbolic interaction theory is founded on the assumption that we make sense of the world through our interactions with others. At a basic level, we interpret what a word or symbol means, based in part on how other people react to our use of that word or symbol. We learn, for example, that certain four-letter words have power because we see people react when they hear them. Even our understanding of who we think we are is influenced by what others tell us we are. For example, you may not think you are a good dancer, but after several friends compliment your dazzling dance moves, you start believing that you do have dancing talent. Central to understanding ourselves is realizing the importance of other people in shaping that self-understanding. Symbolic interaction theory has had a major influence on communication theory because of the pervasive way our communication with others influences our very sense of who we are.

George Herbert Mead is credited with the development of symbolic interaction theory, although Mead did not write extensively about his theory.97 One of Mead’s students, Herbert Blumer, actually coined the term symbolic interaction to describe the process through which our interactions influence our thoughts about others, our life experiences, and ourselves. Mead believed that we cannot have a self-identity without interactions with other people.

Being OTHER-Oriented
By reflecting upon your past interactions with others, you may gain insights about whether you think of yourself as an “I”—an individual based primarily on your own self-generated thoughts—or a “me”—a reflection of how others see you. Think about the labels you give yourself and then consider: Are most of those labels self-generated (I messages) or do they come from others (me messages)? How powerful are others in influencing who you think you are?

Because the influence of others on your life is so far reaching, it is sometimes hard to be consciously aware of how other people shape your thoughts. One of the ways to be more mindful of others’ influence is to become increasingly other-oriented; this is essential for the development of quality relationships. Becoming other-oriented involves recognizing that your concept of self (who you think you are) is different from how others perceive you—even though it is influenced by others, as suggested by symbolic interaction theory. Mead suggests that we come to think of ourselves both as “I,” based on our own perception of ourselves, and as “me,” based on the collective responses we receive and interpret from others. Being aware of how your concept of self (“I”) differs from the perceptions others have of you (“me”) is an important first step in developing an other-orientation.

Although it may seem complicated, it is really quite simple: You affect others and others affect you. Your ability to predict how others will respond to you is based on your skill in understanding how your sense of the world is similar to and different from theirs. To enhance your skill in understanding this process, you need to know yourself well. But understanding yourself is only half the process; you also need to be other-oriented. One of the best ways to improve your ability to be other-oriented is to notice how others respond when you act on the predictions and assumptions you have made about them. For example, you assume that your friend, who is out of work and struggling to make ends meet, will like it if you pick up the check for lunch. When she offers an appreciative “Thank you so much,” you have received confirmation that he or she appreciated your generosity.

Being OTHER-Oriented
By becoming a detective, you can find clues in the behavior of others to determine if the assumptions you have made about them are accurate. Reflect on times when you have accurately identified another person’s emotions and compare those instances to other times when you were not as accurate. What kinds of clues help you accurately predict others’ moods and feelings?

2.5.2 Self and Your Future
Listen to the audio

What people believe about themselves often comes true because they expect it to happen. Their expectations become a self-fulfilling prophecy. If you think you will fail the math quiz because you have labeled yourself inept at math, then you must overcome not only your math deficiency, but also your low expectations of yourself. The theme of George Bernard Shaw’s Pygmalion is “If you treat a girl like a flower girl, that’s all she will ever be. If you treat her like a princess, she may be one.” Research suggests that you can create your own obstacles to achieving your goals by being too critical of yourself.98 Or you can increase your chances for success by having a more positive mindset.99 Your attitudes, beliefs, and general expectations about your performance have a powerful and profound effect on your behavior.

The medical profession is learning about the healing power that attitudes and expectations can have. Physician Howard Brody’s research has found that in many instances, just giving patients a placebo—a pill with no medicine in it—or telling patients that they have been operated on when they have not had an operation can yield positive medical results. In his book The Placebo Response, Brody tells a story about a woman with debilitating Parkinson’s disease who made a miraculous recovery after doctors told her that they had completed a medical procedure.100 They hadn’t. Yet before the “treatment,” she could barely walk; now she can easily pace around the room. There is a clear link, according to Brody, between mental state and physical health. Patients who believe they will improve are more likely to do so.

A photo shows Sheryl Sandberg launching her book “Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead.”
In her book, Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead, Sheryl Sandberg stresses the importance of setting high expectations of yourself and your abilities in order to increase your chances for success.

Taylor Hill/FilmMagic/Getty Images

2.5.3 Self and Interpretation of Messages
Listen to the audio

Although it may have been many years since you read A. A. Milne’s classic children’s stories about Winnie-the-Pooh, you probably remember his donkey friend Eeyore, who lives in the gloomiest part of the Hundred Acre Wood and has a self-image to match.101

Perhaps you know or have known an Eeyore—someone whose low self-esteem colors how he or she interprets messages and interacts with others. According to research, such people are more likely to102

be more sensitive to criticism and negative feedback from others,

be more critical of others,

believe they are not popular or respected by others,

expect to be rejected by others,

prefer not to be observed while performing,

feel threatened by people whom they feel are superior,

expect to lose when competing with others,

be overly responsive to praise and compliments, and

evaluate their overall behavior as inferior to that of others.

The Pooh stories offer an antidote to Eeyore’s gloom in the character of the optimistic Tigger, who assumes that everyone shares his exuberance for life.103 If, like Tigger, your sense of self-esteem is high, research suggests you will104

have higher expectations for solving problems,

think more highly of others,

be more likely to accept praise and accolades from others without feeling embarrassed,

be more comfortable having others observe you when you perform,

be more likely to admit you have both strengths and weaknesses,

prefer to interact with others who view themselves as highly competent,

expect other people to accept you for who you are,

be more likely to seek opportunities to improve skills that need improving, and

evaluate your overall behavior more positively than would people with lower self-esteem.

2.5.4 Self and Interpersonal Needs
Listen to the audio

According to social psychologist Will Schutz, our concept of who we are, coupled with our need to interact with others, profoundly influences how we communicate with others. Schutz identifies three primary social needs that affect the degree of communication we have with others: the need for inclusion, the need for control, and the need for affection.105

Inclusion
Each of us has a need for inclusion—the desire to participate in activities with others and to experience human contact and fellowship. We need to be invited to join others. Of course, the level and intensity of this need differ from person to person, but even loners desire some social contact. Your personality and your genetic makeup, as discussed earlier, play a major role in your need for inclusion. Research has found that we spend time on Facebook or other social media sites to meet our need for inclusion.106

Not only do you have a need to be included, you also have a need to include others. Perhaps you know someone who consistently invites others to join groups or attend parties. Some people have a strong need to make sure no one is left out or that others are invited to social gatherings. Our need to include others and be included in activities may stem, in part, from our concept of ourselves as either a “party person” or a loner.

Control
We also have a need for control. We need some degree of influence over the relationships we establish with others. Individuals with a high need for control are likely to seek leadership roles and generally be more directive in telling others what to do or how to behave. Again, your personality and your biology, as well as learned behaviors (as explained by the social learning theory), are factors that influence your need for control.

In addition to a need to control others, you may also have a need to be controlled because you desire some level of stability and comfort in your interactions with others. Sometimes you just want someone else to make the decisions; you do not want to be responsible or decide what to do. This need to be controlled is strong in some people, while others may prefer minimal control from others and resent being told what to do.

Affection
Finally, we each have a need for affection. We need to give and receive love, support, warmth, and intimacy, although the amounts we need vary enormously from person to person. Those individuals with a high need for affection seek compliments and are comfortable in relationships in which they feel highly supported, confirmed, and loved.107

And just as you have a need to receive affection, you also have a need to express affection toward others. Some people have a high need to express love and support, whereas others may have a low need to express affection.

The greater our interpersonal needs for inclusion, control, and affection, the more likely it is that we will actively seek others as friends and initiate communication with them.

2.5.5 Self and Disclosure to Others
Listen to the audio

When we interact with others, we sometimes share information about ourselves—we self-disclose. Self-disclosure occurs when we purposefully provide information to others about ourselves that they would not learn if we did not tell them. Self-disclosure ranges from revealing basic information about yourself, such as where you were born, to admitting your deepest fears and most private fantasies. Disclosing personal information not only provides a basis for another person to understand you better, it also conveys your level of trust and acceptance of the other person. One study found a positive relationship between the amount of self-disclosure among couples and increased feelings of “passionate love.”108 We introduce the concept of self-disclosure in this chapter because it is an important element in helping us understand ourselves.

Why We Self-Disclose
We are much more likely to self-disclose to someone whom we feel close to, and we are less likely to self-disclose if we think we might lose someone’s respect and admiration.109 When others self-disclose, you learn information about them and deepen your interpersonal relationships with them.110 Another factor that has been found to influence the amount of self-disclosure is your overall mood. If you are feeling good about yourself and are in a positive mood, you are more likely to self-disclose. Someone who has consumed more alcohol than is advisable and is feeling mellow and “happy” (as well as having lowered inhibitions) may share more details about his or her life than you wish to hear. Someone who is sober and feeling less positive may be less likely to share intimate, personal information.111

We also tend to self-disclose to those whom we trust. We share more personal, intimate information if we think others will not tell our personal secrets. We withhold information from others because they may tell what we have shared in confidence, or because we fear rejection or loss of respect if we reveal our honest thoughts. To be truly known (by honestly and completely disclosing who we are) and truly loved (cherished even though the other person knows our “sins” and blemishes) is rare interpersonal intimacy. Theologian John Powell wisely observed, “Why am I afraid to tell you who I am? I am afraid to tell you who I am because, if I tell you who I am, you may not like who I am, and it’s all that I have . . . .”112

Self-Disclosure on Social Media
Social media is a typical source of self-disclosure. Our tweets and posts on Facebook and Instagram routinely include personal information. Social media researcher Bradley Bond found that women are more likely to self-disclose more information on a wider range of topics on Facebook than men do.113 Women are also “marginally more likely to report being sexually expressive on their profiles.”114 You might think that people self-disclose more on anonymous blogs. But researchers found a link between people who post photos of themselves on their blogs and increased sharing of personal information.115 Although some social media apps (like the now defunct Yik Yak) allow people to post anonymously, users of these apps still tend to reveal very personal information about themselves and others. If you have a Facebook profile, you may want to monitor your level of self-disclosure when posting photos and comments about your daily routine. Potential employers sometimes seek information about job applicants on social media to assess their qualifications. Because self-disclosure is the primary way we establish and maintain interpersonal relationships, we will discuss self-disclosure in considerable detail in Chapter 9.

In order to disclose personal information to others, whether online or in person, you must first have self-awareness, an understanding of who you are. In addition to just thinking about who you are, asking others for information about yourself and then listening to what they tell you can enhance your self-awareness.

The Johari Window Model of Being Known to Self and Others
The Johari Window model nicely summarizes how your awareness of who you are is influenced by your own level of disclosure, as well as by how much information others share about you with you. (The name “Johari Window” sounds somewhat mystical and exotic, but it is simply a combination of the first names of the creators of the model, Joseph Luft and Harry Ingham.116) As Figure 2.5 shows, the model looks like a set of windows, and the windows represent your self. This self includes everything about you, including things even you do not yet see or realize. One axis is divided into what you have come to know about yourself and what you do not yet know about yourself. The other axis represents what someone else may know about you and not know about you. The intersection of these categories creates four windows, or quadrants.

Open: Known to Self and Known to Others
Quadrant 1 is an open area. The open area contains information that others know about you and that you are also aware of—such as your age and occupation, as well as other things you might mention about yourself. At first glance, all four quadrants appear to be the same size. But that may not be the case (in fact, it probably isn’t). In the case of quadrant 1, the more information that you reveal about yourself, the larger this quadrant will be. Put another way, the more you open up to others, the larger the open area will be.

Being OTHER-Oriented
Some things about ourselves we learn from others: elements of our personality (both positive and negative characteristics) and talents we have. What aspects of your personality or talents have you learned about from others but might not have known about if someone had not shared them with you? How have others helped you learn about yourself?

Blind: Not Known to Self but Known to Others
Quadrant 2 is a blind area. This window contains information that other people know about you, but that you do not know. Perhaps when you were in grade school, as a joke someone put a sign on your back that said, “Kick me.” Everyone was aware of the sign but you. The blind window represents the same situation. For example, you may see yourself as generous, but others may see you as a tightwad. As you learn how others see you, the blind window gets smaller. Generally, the more accurately you know yourself and perceive how others see you, the better your chances are to establish open and honest relationships with others.

Hidden: Known to Self but Not Known to Others
Quadrant 3 is a hidden area. This area contains information that you know about yourself, but that others do not know about you. You can probably think of many facts, thoughts, feelings, and fantasies that you would not want anyone else to know. They may be feelings you have about another person or something you have done privately in the past that you would be embarrassed to share with others. The point here is not to suggest you should share all information in the hidden area with others. However, it is useful to know that part of who you are remains hidden from others.

Unknown: Not Known to Self or Others
Quadrant 4 is an unknown area. This area contains information that is unknown to both you and others. These are things you do not know about yourself yet. Perhaps you do not know how you will react under certain stressful situations. Maybe you are not sure what stand you will take on a certain issue next year or even next week. Other people may also not be aware of how you would respond or behave under certain conditions. Your personal potential, your untapped physical and mental resources, are unknown. You can assume that this area exists, because eventually some (though not necessarily all) of these things will become known to you, to others, or to both you and others. Because you can never know yourself completely, the unknown quadrant will always exist; you can only guess at its current size, because the information it contains is unavailable to you.

We can draw Johari Windows to represent each of our relationships (see Figure 2.6). Part A shows a new or restricted relationship for someone who knows himself or herself very well. The open and blind quadrants are small, but the unknown quadrant is also small. Part B shows a very intimate relationship, in which both individuals are open and disclosing.

2.5.6 Self and Communication Social Style
Listen to the audio

Over time we develop general patterns or styles of relating to others based on several factors, including our personality, self-concept, self-esteem, and what we choose to disclose to others. Our general style of relating to others is called our communication social style; it is an identifiable way of habitually communicating with others. The concept of communication social styles originates in the work of Carl Jung who, in his book Psychological Types, described people according to four types: thinkers, feelers, intuiters, and sensors.117 (The Myers-Briggs personality inventory, which in part assesses ways of relating to others, is based on Jung’s types.) Communication researchers built on Jung’s pioneering work to identify communication social styles. The communication social style we develop helps others interpret our messages and predict how we will behave. As other people get to know us, they begin to expect us to communicate in a certain way, based on previous associations with us.118

According to communication researchers William Snavely and John McNeill, the notion of communication social style is based on four underlying assumptions about human behavior:

We develop consistent communication behavior patterns over time.

We form impressions of others based on their verbal and nonverbal behavior.

We interact with others based on our perceptions of them.

We develop our perceptions of others based primarily on two dimensions: assertiveness and responsiveness.119

A variety of different communication social style models have been developed during the past thirty years. Regardless of the specific model (some models describe four styles, others include just two), there is general agreement on the two fundamental dimensions of assertiveness (which focuses on accomplishing a task) and responsiveness (which emphasizes concern for relationships) as anchoring elements in determining a person’s social style.120

Assertiveness is the tendency to accomplish a task by making requests, asking for information, and generally looking out for one’s own rights and best interests. An assertive style is sometimes called a “masculine” style. By masculine, we do not mean that only males can be assertive, but that in many cultures, males are expected to be assertive. You are assertive when you seek information if you are confused or direct others to help you get what you need.

Responsiveness is the tendency to focus on the dynamics of relationships with others by being sensitive to their needs. Being other-oriented and sympathetic to the feelings of others and placing others’ feelings above your own are examples of being responsive. Researchers sometimes label responsiveness as a “feminine” quality. Again, this does not mean that only women are or should be responsive, only that many cultures stereotype being responsive as a traditional and expected behavior of females.

Another way to identify your communication social style is to ask your friends, family members, and colleagues who know you best to help you assess your behavior by contributing their perceptions of you as assertive or nonassertive, responsive or nonresponsive.

It is all well and good to understand your own communication social style and to know how your self-concept, self-esteem, personality, and even your biology contribute to a predominant way of interacting with others. But as we have noted before: It’s not always about you. At the heart of interpersonal communication is relating to others. Understanding your self in relation to the style of other people can help you make mindful decisions about how to relate to them. This is not about manipulating people—it is about ethically and sensitively enhancing the quality of your communication with others.

How can you assess another person’s communication social style? Although you are probably not going to have your friends, family members, colleagues, and acquaintances take a test to assess their communication style, you can look for behaviors that indicate their levels of assertiveness and responsiveness.

The longer you know someone, the more likely you are to be able to accurately identify another person’s social style. Tables 2.1 and 2.2 list a few behaviors that may indicate assertiveness or responsiveness. The tables are based on research on the majority population of North Americans, so there are cultural and ethnic limitations to these lists. And we certainly do not claim that by observing these few cues, you can definitively determine someone’s communication social style. But the tables will give you some initial ideas that you can use to later refine your impressions.

Experts who study and apply communication social style research suggest that the simplest way to adapt your style to enhance communication quality is to communicate in ways that more closely match the style of the other person. Keep the following principles in mind as you consider your communication social style and the social styles of others:

Most people have a dominant communication social style (a primary way of interacting with others) that includes the two dimensions of assertiveness and responsiveness.

No single communication social style is best for all situations—every style has advantages and disadvantages. Specific circumstances should help you determine whether you should be more assertive or more responsive toward others.

To enhance interpersonal communication, it is useful to understand both your style and the style of the other person and then decide whether or not to adapt your communication social style.

Applying an Other-Orientation
Self and Interpersonal Communication

“To thine own self be true.” In this famous line from Act I, Scene iii of Hamlet, Polonius is providing advice to his son Laertes as Laertes prepares to travel abroad. Polonius gives Laertes a number of suggestions, and concludes with this wise fatherly advice: “This above all, to thine own self be true,/And it must follow, as the night the day,/Thou canst not then be false to any man.”

In this chapter we have discussed the significance of self-perception and self-esteem and how they affect your relationships with others. Although we have emphasized the importance of being other-oriented, we conclude the chapter by echoing Polonius’s advice to his son: Be true to yourself.

To be other-oriented does not mean only behaving in people-pleasing ways in order to ingratiate yourself with others. Rather, as an other-oriented communicator, you are aware of the thoughts and feelings of others, but remain true to your own ethics and beliefs. For example, if you object to watching violent movies and a group of your friends invites you to see a “slasher” film, you do not have to watch it with them. Nor do you have to make a self-righteous speech about your feelings about violent movies; you can simply excuse yourself after calmly saying you do not like those kinds of movies. You do not have to do what others do just to be popular. As your mother may have said in exasperation when you were growing up, “If all of your friends jumped off a cliff, would you jump too?” In essence, your mother was echoing Polonius’s counsel to be true to yourself rather than blindly following the herd.

The word credo means belief. What is your personal credo or set of beliefs? Being aware of your personal beliefs—whether about things philosophical or spiritual, about human nature, or about the political and social issues of the day—can serve as an anchoring point for your interactions with others. Without knowing where your “home” is—your personal credo—you will not know how far away from “home” you’ve traveled as you make your way in the world and relate to others.

Tension is sometimes evident between being true to yourself and being true to others. Consider drafting your own personal credo, your statement of core beliefs, so that you can more mindfully follow Polonius’s advice to be true to yourself as you relate to others.